OCPBUGS-6787: Add runbook for KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled (#134)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/cluster-monitoring-operator/KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled.md

# KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled

## Meaning

The `KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled` alert triggers when, over a defined time interval,
an excessive number of DaemonSet pods are discovered to be running on the nodes
where they should not be running. This condition typically occurs when a pod is
scheduled on a node with a taint for which the pod does not have a corresponding
toleration.

## Impact

DaemonSet pods are running on the nodes where they are not supposed to run, which

> results in excessive resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
results in excessive resources.
```

## Diagnosis

- Check DaemonSet status:

  ```console
  oc -n $NAMESPACE describe daemonset $NAME
  ```

  Replace `$NAME` with the name of the DaemonSet having the issue.
  The namespace name is included along with alert labels, so replace
  `$NAMESPACE` with the namespace name from the received alert.

- Check the status of the pods belonging to the DaemonSet and examine the `Node`,
  `Tolerations`, and `NodeSelector` fields:

  ```console

>   oc -n $NAMESPACE describe pod $NAME

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  oc -n $NAMESPACE describe daemonset $NAME
```

  - Look for the `Node`, `Node-Selectors` and `Tolerations` fields in the output.

  - Check the labels for the node and verify that they match
    the `NodeSelector` value for the pod.

    ```console
    oc get node $NAME --show-labels
    ```

    Replace `$NAME` with the node name of the pod having the issue.

  - Verify that the `Node-Selectors` field for the pod has one of the
    same labels as the node

    ```console
    oc -n $NAMESPACE describe pod $NAME | grep Node-Selectors
    ```

  - Check the `Taints` value for the node and verify that it matches the
    `Tolerations` value for the pod:

    - Check the taints for the node:

      ```console
      oc describe node $NAME
      ```

      Replace $NAME with the name of the node identified in the previous step.

    - Check the tolerations for the pod:

      ```console
      oc-n $NAMESPACE describe pod $NAME | grep Tolerations
      ```

     Replace `$NAMESPACE` with the namespace name and `$NAME` with the name of
     the pod having the issue.

    - Verify that the identified `Taints` are tolerated, that is, that they are
      identified in the `Tolerations` field in the previous step.
  
## Mitigation

> - Verify node health [1]

Reviewer: from doc view:
https://github.com/openshift/runbooks/blob/943b6b157422fea3adbd61e30d39b2c683ae51be/alerts/cluster-monitoring-operator/KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled.md, the link for `1` maybe puzzled user at the first glance
![link](https://github.com/juzhao/test/assets/22743651/d0ae66ac-5cd4-4a01-9777-e3ffb3568a49)

# KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled

## Meaning

The `KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled` alert triggers when, over a defined time interval,

> an excessive number of daemonset pods are found running on nodes where they

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
an excessive number of DaemonSet pods are discovered to be running on nodes where they
```

should not be running. This condition typically occurs when a pod is scheduled

> on a node with a taint that doesn't have a corresponding toleration, or when a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
on a node with a taint for which the pod does not have a corresponding toleration, or when a
```

node is unhealthy or overloaded, which can hinder pod scheduling.

## Impact

Daemonset pod may not run on all the expected nodes so some functionalities like

> node metrics or DNS service may be degraded.

Reviewer 2: I misread the alert name in my initial review and assumed that it was documenting the KubeDaemonSetRolloutStuck/KubeDaemonSetNotScheduled alerts.

In the case of KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled, the impact is of the daemonset running on more nodes than expected is different, though I'm not sure how we should phrase it. I'm not even sure how to trigger the alert in the first place :thinking:

Reviewer 2: ok, I forgot that we had some background in the original bug :facepalm:

Author: My bad I read it incorrectly. I updated with change.

> Daemonset pods are running where they are not supposed to run. Excessive resource
> usage where they could be used by other apps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
DaemonSet pods are running on nodes where they are not supposed to run, which results in excessive resource
usage.
```
That last part of the sentence isn't necessary, I think

## Diagnosis

> - Check Daemonset status

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Check DaemonSet status:
```

  ```console
  oc -n $NAMESPACE describe daemonset $NAME
  ```

>   Replace $NAME with the name of the Daemonset having the issue.
>   $NAMESPACE comes along with alert labels, replace it with respective value
>   from the alert received.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Replace `$NAME` with the name of the DaemonSet having the issue.
  The namespace name is included along with alert labels, so replace `$NAMESPACE` with the namespace name
  from the received alert.
```

> - Check the status of the pods belonging to the Daemonset and look for the `Node`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Check the status of the pods belonging to the DaemonSet and examine the `Node`,
```

  `Tolerations`, and `NodeSelector` fields:

  ```console
  oc -n $NAMESPACE describe pod $NAME
  ```

>   Replace $NAME with the name of the pod having the issue.

Author: In above statement we say
`Check the status of the pods belonging to the Daemonset and look for the `Node`,
  `Tolerations`, and `NodeSelector` fields:
`

>   Replace $NAME with the name of the pod having the issue.

Reviewer 2: I think we should rather tell the user how to collect node taints and daemonset's node selector + tolerations

````
oc get nodes -o jsonpath='{range .items[*]}{ .metadata.name }{"\t"}taints: { .spec.taints }{"\n"}{end}'
oc get daemonset node-exporter -o jsonpath='node selector: { .spec.template.spec.nodeSelector }{"\n"}tolerations: { .spec.template.spec.tolerations }{"\n"}'
````

  - Look for the `Node`, `Node-Selectors` and `Tolerations` fields in the output.

>   - Check the labels for the node and verify with `NodeSelector` on the pod.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Check the labels for the node and verify that they match the `NodeSelector` values for the pod.
```
Not sure if this is what you mean, but it's unclear to me what "verify with" means here.

    ```console
    oc get node $NAME --show-labels
    ```

>     Replace $NAME with the node name of the pod having the issue.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Replace `$NAME` with the node name of the pod having the issue.
```

>   - Verify whether `Node-Selectors` field for the pod has one of the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Verify that the `Node-Selectors` field for the pod has one of the
```

    same labels as the node

    ```console
    oc -n $NAMESPACE describe pod $NAME | grep Node-Selectors
    ```

>   - Check the `Taints` for the node and verify that it matches the
>     `Tolerations` on the pod:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Check the `Taints` value for the node and verify that it matches the
    `Tolerations` value for the pod:
```

>     - Check `Taints` on the node

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Check the taints for the node:
```

      ```console
      oc describe node $NAME
      ```

      Replace $NAME with the name of the node identified in the previous step.

>     - Check `Tolerations` on the pod

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Check the tolerations for the pod:
```

      ```console
      oc-n $NAMESPACE describe pod $NAME | grep Tolerations
      ```

>       Replace $NAME with the name of the pod having the issue.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      Replace `$NAMESPACE` with the namespace name and `$NAME` with the name of the pod having the issue.
```

>     - Verify that the identified `Taints` are tolerated (identified in the
>       `Tolerations` field in the previous step).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Verify that the identified `Taints` are tolerated, that is, that they are identified in the
      `Tolerations` field in the previous step.
```

> ## Mitigation

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if there's much that can be done to mitigate the alert if the affected daemonset is managed by OCP? E.g. any change to the daemonset tolerations should be reverted by the managing operator?

Author: Taints can be still checked if thats been tolerated or not right?

- Verify node health [1]
  - If nodes are unhealthy or unsuitable for running pods, consider draining or
    evicting pods from those nodes to allow them to recover or be replaced.

> - Inspect the daemonSet configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Inspect the DaemonSet configuration:
```

>   - Examine the YAML configuration of the daemonset(s) causing the issue. Ensure

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Examine the YAML configuration of the DaemonSet(s) causing the issue. Ensure
```

    that the tolerations and node selectors are correctly set to match

>     the desired nodes.

Reviewer 2: This is rather the Diagnosis phase, no?

Reviewer 3: I agree with Simon. The info in this section should be incorporated into the diagnosis section.

- Check pod template parameters such as the following:

>   - `pod priority`:  A setting for this parameter might cause the pod to be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `pod priority`:  A setting for this parameter can cause the pod to be
```

>      evicted by other more important pods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     evicted by higher priority pods.
```
I don't think that `important` is the right word here. All the pods are important in their own way, right? Maybe it's better to frame it as a question of priority?

>   - `affinity rules`: A setting for this parameter might restrict the number of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `affinity rules`: A setting for this parameter can restrict the number of
```

     nodes, which will make it impossible for other pods to be scheduled.

- Check taints and tolerations:

  - Verify that the nodes where mis-scheduled pods are running have the
    expected taints.
  - Confirm that the pods have tolerations matching those taints.

- Inspect the Kubernetes event logs for any relevant events that might explain

>   why pods were scheduled where they should not be.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  why pods were mis-scheduled.
```

# KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled

## Meaning

> The `KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled` alert triggers when, over a defined time interval, an excessive number of daemonset pods are found running on nodes where they should not be. This typically occurs when a pod is scheduled on a node with a taint that doesn't have a corresponding toleration, or when a node is unhealthy or overloading, hindering pod scheduling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `KubeDaemonSetMisScheduled` alert triggers when, over a defined time interval, an excessive number of daemonset pods are found running on nodes where they should not be. This typically occurs when a pod is scheduled on a node with a taint that doesn't have a corresponding toleration, or when a node is unhealthy or overloaded, hindering pod scheduling.
```

## Impact

> Excessive resource usage where they could be used by other applications

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I'd say that the main impact is that the daemonset pod may not run on all the expected nodes so some functionalities like node metrics or DNS service may be degraded.

## Diagnosis

- Check Daemonset status

  ```console

>   oc -n $NAMESPACE describe daemonset $NAME

Reviewer 2: (nit) explain that NAMESPACE comes from the alert labels.

  ```

> - Check the status of the pods belonging to the Daemonset and look for the fields Node, Tolerations and NodeSelector:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Check the status of the pods belonging to the Daemonset and look for the `Node`, `Tolerations`, and `NodeSelector` fields:
```

  ```console
  oc -n $NAMESPACE describe pod $NAME
  ```

>   Replace $NAME with the name of the pod having issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Replace $NAME with the pod name of the pod having issue.
```

>   Replace $NAME with the name of the pod having issue.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Replace $NAME with the name of the pod having the issue.
```

>   -  Look for the `Node`, `Node-Selectors` and `Tolerations` fields in the output

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  -  Look for the `Node`, `Node-Selectors` and `Tolerations` fields in the output.
```

> - Check labels for the node and verify with `NodeSelector` on Pod

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Check the labels for the node and verify with `NodeSelector` on the pod.
```

  ```console
  oc get node $NAME --show-labels
  ```

>   Replace $NAME with the name of the pod having issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Replace $NAME with the node name of the pod having issue.
```

>   Replace $NAME with the name of the pod having issue.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Replace $NAME with the name of the pod having an issue.
```

>     - Verify whether `Node-Selector` field for pod has one of the labels of node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Verify whether `Node-Selectors` field for pod has one of the labels of node
```
see
```
$ oc -n openshift-monitoring describe pod node-exporter-b6crr | grep Node-Selectors
Node-Selectors:              kubernetes.io/os=linux

```

>     - Verify whether `Node-Selector` field for pod has one of the labels of node

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Verify whether the `Node-Selectors` field for the pod has one of the same labels as the node.
```

> - Check Taint for the node and verify with `Toleration` on Pod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check Taint for the node and verify with `Tolerations` on Pod
```
see
```
$ oc -n openshift-monitoring describe pod node-exporter-b6crr | grep Tolerations
Tolerations:                 op=Exists
```

> - Check Taint for the node and verify with `Toleration` on Pod

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Check the `Taint` for the node and verify that it matches the `Toleration` on the pod.
```
Not sure if this rewording is till accurate, but the current wording is unclear to me.

>   Replace $NAME with the name of the node identified in previous step.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Replace $NAME with the name of the node identified in the previous step.
```

    ```console
    oc describe node $NAME
    ```

>   - Look for the field `Taints`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Look for the `Taints` field.
```

>   - Verify whether `Taints `identified are tolerated (identified in `Tolerations` field in previous step)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Verify whether the identified `Taints` are tolerated, that is, that they are identified in the `Tolerations` field in the revious step.
```

  
## Mitigation

> - Inspect DaemonSet Configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Inspect the daemonSet configuration:
```

>   - Examine the YAML configuration of the daemonset(s) causing the issue. Ensure that the tolerations and node selectors are correctly set to match the desired nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Examine the YAML configuration of the daemonset or daemonsets causing the issue. Ensure that the tolerations and node selectors are correctly set to match the desired nodes.
```

> - Check pod template parameters such as:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Check pod template parameters such as the following:
```

>   - pod priority - maybe it was evicted by other more important pods
>   - affinity rules - maybe due to affinities and not enough nodes it is not possible to schedule pods

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `pod priority`:  A setting for this parameter might cause the pod to be evicted by other more important pods.
  - `affinity rules`: A setting for this parameter might restrict the number of nodes, which will make it impossible for other pods to be scheduled.
```

> - Check Taints and Tolerations:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Check taints and tolerations:
```

  - Verify that the nodes where mis-scheduled pods are running have the expected taints.
  - Confirm that the pods have tolerations matching those taints.

> - Inspect Kubernetes event logs for any relevant events that might explain why pods were scheduled where they shouldn't be.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Inspect the Kubernetes event logs for any relevant events that might explain why pods were scheduled where they should not be.
```

> - Verify [node health](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/support/troubleshooting/verifying-node-health.html) 

Reviewer 2: I would move this first since resource shortage is probably the main reason for the alert to fire.
